Social Media Best Practices Guide
Prepared by Alexandra Tursi, September 2015, for the Vermont Agency of Agriculture.

A collection of best practices for social media with a focus on the most used
social media channels -- Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, Instagram, and blogs – as
well as top tips for hosting a social media contest.


Best Practices for Facebook Pages
1. Optim ize your posts. Make the most of
your posts by optimizing them for Facebook’s
algorithm. See “Anatomy of a Successful
Facebook Post” at right. Also, more and more
people are accessing Facebook on a mobile
device, so make sure that your post displays
well on mobile (e.g., you don’t want to post an
graphic with a font so tiny you can’t read it!)
2. Post every day. It may seem excessive,
but as people make more friends and “Like”
more pages, your posts may be missed.
Studies show posting 3-5 times a day is a good
amount for pages. Check Facebook Insights to
see when your audience is online. Then, try
posting at optimal times, like once in the
morning and once in the evening.
3. Focus on engagem ent. Social media is
social! Talk to your audience. Connect with
them and get responses! Ask questions, post
helpful tips, and link to articles that your
audience will “Like” and share. Make the posts about your audience and what they
need, rather than selling you. Tag other users and business pages, too. Star or
highlight posts. Use hashtags. To make posts “shareworthy,” consider these top
types of content people love to share: lists, infographics, how-to articles, news,
images, videos, stories that solve problems, stats and facts, and quotes.
4. Have a call-to-action. This is critical. You want your fans to take the next step
with you. So, tell people exactly what to do, such as click “Like,” comment on a
post, share a post, watch a video, or click a link to your website or event page. Be
specific and explicit. Don’t play coy!
5. Don’t oversell, but don’t undersell either. No one likes a never-ending
sales pitch, but do highlight your product or service from time-to-time! Use the 8020 rule for content/connection posts vs. sales messages. Think of fun ways to talk
about your products, too. IKEA did a fun post where they published a photo of a
room with their products. They then asked fans to tag themselves as the products
they had. Can you say “viral”?


6. M ake it fun. Facebook is a social community. People are there to have fun.
Stay true to your brand, but think of ways to entertain your audience and let your
hair down. Sometimes a fun or funny photo or a video is all you need to post – and
you would be surprised that it gets the most engagement, but that’s because that is
how your fans use Facebook. Just look at your own personal Facebook feed – what
gets to you to like or comment? Let your answer guide you!
7. Get creative. Amp up your visuals. You can do many things to make your
Facebook cover photo creative and interactive: Connect the profile picture to the
cover photo, highlight a product, highlight a fan of the week, give a creative use of
the product, show fans using the product or service. Also, when you post your own
photos, brand them with your logo and Web URL.
8. Follow a content calendar. Posting regularly can be daunting. Plan ahead to
avoid stressing out. Create a content calendar that includes your events,
promotions and special occasions or seasonal happenings on an annual and
monthly basis AND a weekly calendar that can give structure to your daily content,
such as links to your own blog, third party links, photos, a question of the day, etc.
As you develop your weekly content calendar, your community will also get to know
your pattern and they will look forward to certain weekly content.
9. W atch Facebook Insights. Click on over to “Posts” under the “Insights” tab
to get a good picture of your interaction levels. Look for content and engagement
trends and keep posting more of what your audience “likes.”
10. Run Facebook Ads. While you can build a great Facebook community, the truth
is that today you never quite get to communicate with it as effectively as you’d like. You
can post great items on your page, but they have to compete for attention in a user’s
busy Newsfeed. The best way to communicate with your audience is paid advertising
on Facebook. You can target the fans of your page, but you can also target your target
audience by setting up ads based on demographics, behaviors, and geography. Get
started at http://www.facebook.com/business/ads/.


Best Practices for Twitter
1. Optimize your tweets. Data show that the tweet sweet spot is between 120
and 130 characters. This also leaves room for a link as well as for 1-3 hashtags.
2. M ention other users. If you're sharing a quote, stat, or article from a brand or
user, be sure to include that brand or user's handle in the tweet. This will increase
the likelihood of them seeing your tweet and retweeting it to their own audience.
The more your content is shared, the more following you'll gain, and the more your
message will be spread.
3. Understand replies versus m entions. To know how your content is being
shared, you need to know how your content is being seen. When you place a Twitter
handle directly at the beginning of a tweet, you're directly sending a message to a user,
but it is not a private direct message. That tweet can also be seen by anyone who
follows both your account and the account you're tweeting to. If you want everyone to
see your tweet, regardless of whether they are following both you and the person
you're mentioning, a common tactic is to add a period as a character at the start of the
tweet.
4. Use hashtags wisely. As if seeing #every #other #word in a #tweet as a #hashtag
isn't irking enough, a report from Salesforce even revealed that tweets with one or two
hashtags receive 21 percent higher engagement than those with three or more
hashtags.
5. Incorporate visual content. An analysis from Simply Measured shows that while
photos are not shared as frequently as normal tweets (tweets that are solely text-based),
tweets with photos receive the highest engagement. While this could be related to the
fact that fewer photos are shared than text-based tweets, it's important to test out using
visuals. In fact, Hubspot’s analysis has shown that tweets with images see a 55 percent
increase in leads! Be sure to upload photos in the proper size. For the perfect image
appearance in a user's activity stream, upload photos 440 pixels by 220 pixels.
6. Place links in the m iddle of your tweet. Place links about 25 percent of the
way through a tweet. Data from Dan Zarrella shows that links placed earlier in a tweet
receive much higher click-through rates than links placed at the end of a tweet.
Presenting the link earlier catches a reader's attention faster.
7. Shorten links for cleaner tweets. Shortened links host tracking information for
you to assess the effectiveness of your tweets, and they also appear much cleaner in a
tweet. A link can be around 20 characters before Twitter crops the tweet with an
ellipsis.


8. Optimize your publishing calendar. As important as how you tweet is when
you tweet. Key tweeting times are between 1 p.m. and 3 p.m. Monday to Thursday.
The data also shows that the best time to get retweet is from 4 p.m. to 5 p.m. on
Fridays.
9. Gain insights from Twitter Analytics. Measure engagement and learn how to
make your tweets more successful in the same way you use Facebook Insights. You can
use Twitter Analytics to learn more about your followers (their interests, locations, and
demographics) and how to use “Twitter Cards” to drive clicks and retweets. Knowledge
is power as they say – use it!
10. Test Twitter Ads. These ads are a fantastic way to grow your follower base, drive
website clicks and conversions, increase engagement, and find leads. And, they are
relatively inexpensive to purchase. Totally worth a test run!


Best Practices for Pinterest
1. Choose an optim ized com pany usernam e. Optimize your Pinterest business
account for search by choosing a straightforward username. Usernames are confined to
15 characters. If your full company name fits – great! But, if it doesn’t, choose
something memorable, keyword-conscious, easy to spell, and clearly associated with
your business.
2. Optim ize your “About” section. You get 200 characters of prime keyword real
estate, so use it wisely. In addition to being descriptive and keyword-sensitive, your
‘About’ section should be simple, succinct, and specific. Cover the who, what, and
where of what you do. Don’t forget to add your website URL in the space provided!
3. Include links back to your website. Always, always, always include a reference
link back to your website with your pins! Including a link back to your website reinforces
that the image is associated with your brand AND it also opens up a direct pathway to
purchase your product or learn more about your services.
4. Differentiate your pinboard s. Break through the pinboard name clutter and be
specific and keyword-smart in the selection of your board names. Align board names
with what end users might be looking for. You can do a Pinterest search to conduct a
little research. Thoughtful board names will help you stand out from the massive clutter
of default or unoriginal board names.
5. Speak your custom ers’ language. Use terms your customers use in their
everyday lives. Understand what they are looking for, what they are most interested in
buying or pinning, and what related industries or topics the pinner might be seeking
out. Your boards should not be an advertising board for your products; instead, make it
a space that’s curated around the needs and lifestyle of your customers.
6. Use pin descriptions wisely. The biggest opportunity for text-based content on
Pinterest is the description area for each individual pin. You get 500 characters to
describe each pin, and people pay attention. HubSpot researched 11,000 pins and
found that the most re-pinned and commented on items were accompanied by
descriptions ranging from 200-310 words.
7. M ake sure im ages have descriptive nam es. Don’t use default names (e.g., an
image named “1.13.13Shootimage722.jpg”). It doesn’t help you at all in search (while a
clearly named “maple-mocha-latte.jpg”) can help a search engine decipher what your
image is about much more easily. Similarly, if you pin an image from your website,
make sure that image has clear alt text associated with it. The same pin descriptions
rules apply here: use naming conventions your customers will identify with. If a product


you’re pinning has an obscure name, isn’t broadly known or intuitive, skip it in favor of a
potential keyword search term.
8. “Pinjack” relevant search term s and im ages. “Pinjacking” trends and events
can be a great way to increase your organic search. For example, one of the top
organic Google search results for “DIY Halloween costumes” comes not from Walmart,
Target, or some costume shop, but from goodwill industries of western Michigan. Do
some search research to see what trends you can jump on!
9. Add Pin it buttons and widgets to your site. The pin it button lets people pin
an item from your website to Pinterest. It helps site visitors share your site’s visual
content more easily on Pinterest. No brainer!
10. M easure for success using the Pinterest Analytics. With Pinterest Analytics,
you can see what users like from your profile and what they save from your website. You
can also get data about your audience, too, so you can learn what your customers really
want.


Best Practices for Instagram
1. Post regularly. Fifty-seven percent of the world’s top 100 social brands post at
least once per week; 28 percent post five times per week. Post often to keep your
audience engaged through a frequent and regular flow of content. They will get
familiar with you as they see more content – and be more likely to like and
comment!
2. Use hashtags. Instagram is hashtag heaven. If you have a small audience,
hashtags are a great way to grow your audience by putting yourself in from of users
who are searching those terms. Also think about your own hashtags (branded
hashtags, campaign hashtags, event hashtags, industry hashtags, product hashtags,
and location hashtags). To keep the user experience optimal, post your hashtags as
the first comment on your Instagram post. That keeps you message from getting
lost in a sea of hashtags.
3. Put a filter on it. Instagram is first-and-foremost a photo-editing app, so use
it! You can create beautiful images pretty easily. Be mindful of lighting, object
positioning, colors, and filters – how your Instagram post has a big impact on
engagement. The top filters are those that give a photo a warmer feel – like
Mayfair.
4. Repurpose m arketing and advertising content. Already creating an ad
campaign, or a marketing piece? Figure out how to re-use it on Instagram. Use a
photo from your ad photo shoot!
5. Post tim ely and relevant content. For everything there is a season –
Halloween, holidays, spring-cleaning, and bathing suit season – the list could go on
and on and on. Link your Instagram post to a seasonal trend or current event.
Watch what is trending on Instagram. Become a part of the conversation AND be
relevant to your community.
6. Engage with the com m unity. Use your photo and video captions to ask
questions that may encourage comments and feedback. For example, a coffee
shop might post a photo or video of a barista making a latte and caption it: “Which
pumpkin pastry would you pair with our signature Pumpkin Spice Latte? #PSL”
7. Keep engaging! When you start to receive comments, acknowledge and reply
– keep the conversation going. Ask follow-up questions, answer questions, provide
advice and guidance. Just like you would in a real-life conversation.
8. Run contest and giveaways. This is a great way to build your audience and


increase engagement. Set contest rules that help you do that: require that they
follow you on Instagram, that the like or comment on a post, report one of your
photos, or use a certain hashtag. You can also inspire user-generated content by
asking users to submit photos with a specific contest hashtag. Ben and Jerry’s does
a great job with that.
9. Link your feed to Twitter and Facebook. This way, you can easily share
your Instagram photos on both platforms. Sharing posts can help you drive traffic to
your Instagram page by letting your audience know you are there.
10. Prom ote your Instagram profile! Use your marketing channels to drive
traffic to your Instagram. Consider how you promote it on your website, in email
marketing, your blog and other marketing content and materials, from newsletters
to business cards.


Best Practices for Blogging
1. W ho are you writing for? Determine who your audience is – ideally, your
potential customers. Who are they? What do they do? What do they want? They are
reading your blog for engaging, relevant, and timely information and content. Think
about what they want and what they are interested in! Let that guide the types of
content you publish. In doing so, remember to be helpful, unique, tell stories,
quote experts, and respond quickly to trends or news/current events. The top
formats for blogs are the “curated collection,” the “how to” blog, the “list-based”
blog, and the “newsjacking” blog.
2. Publish quality content. Make sure your blog content is searchable and
findable. Optimize your blog posts for search engines and a good user experience.
Review the “Optimized Blog Post” below to ensure you are doing it right!


3. Get subscribers. Once you have started to gain readers, convert them into
dedicated subscribers who consistently receive your blog content. You want them
to keep coming back for more – and share your blog content. Learn about “The
Anatomy of an Optimized Blog Subscriber Email” by clicking here and referring to
the visual below. Be sure to also have a “blog subscriber email” call-to-action on
your blog!

4. M aintain a routine publishing calendar. A blog will be your most laborintensive effort, so plan wisely. You do not need to publish daily, but you will want
to publish regularly (2-4 posts per month is a great place to start).
5. Find topics your readers are interested in. Here, you have to do a little


research. Use Google’s Keyword Tool to see what people are searching for, ask
your customers what they would like to see on your blog (ask by survey or on your
other social media channels), look at others in your industry to see what they are
blogging about.
6. Use visuals. We are visual learners, so augment your written content with visual
content. Create original images, make images more effective with text overlay, and
invest in your blog’s design.
7. Link to new posts from old posts. If you’re writing about a topic that you’ve
written about before, give your new post a little extra SEO authority by linking to it from
a relevant older post. Once you’ve published your new post, just update your old post
with an appropriate internal link (and relevant anchor text) pointing to that new post.
8. Invite others to participate. Work with guest bloggers and influencers who may
have a larger following than yours to build your blog following, invite a customer or
association member to write about an interesting experience, ask questions at the end
of your blog post.
9. Repurpose and reuse your blogs! You are going to spend time and effort on
your blog posts – so make the most of them. Include them or link to them from your
website, email newsletters, email signatures, social media posts, presentations, videos,
ebooks, and checklists. Also, be sure to share newsworthy blogs with the media.
10. Use the best blogging platform s and tools. Wordpress with Google
Analytics integrated is your best bet! Use comment plug-ins like Disqus to encourage
social media commenting.


Best Practices for Running a Social Media Contest
1. Choose a Prize and Entry M ethod. It could be a gift card, a product, or a
service OR it could be something status-oriented, like being selected as an official
brand blogger or being featured on your website or other marketing and brand
materials. Whatever you choose, make it brand-relevant so you may promote your
product or service in the process.
Next, how will people enter your contest? There are three main ways:
• Contact details: Require that entrants submit contact information, like an
email address.
• Contact details + user-generated content: Ask entrants to enter photos,
video or text to enter. You can use the content in future marketing, ask other
users to help pick a winner, and simply get your fans to spread the word.
• Contact details + social referral: Boost entries by requiring entrants to refer
or share the contest with “X” number of friends.
2. Build Your Contest Page. Keep it simple, but exciting – and above all easy to
enter. Come up with an attention-grabbing title that is short and phrased as a call to
action (“Enter to Win a $50 Gift Card From X Brand”). Also, use graphics of your
prize to entice people. Be sure to include entry and prize information, an entry
submission form, share buttons, and official rules.
3. Prom ote and Share Your Contest. Once you have the contest set up, it’s time
to spread the word. Send an email blast, promote your contest on all of your social
networks, add a banner to your website home page, create a Facebook ad, list your
contest on contesting websites.
4. M onitor Your Contest. You will want to track entries and social conversation to
meet your contest goals. You can do so by using Facebook Insights, Google Alerts
for mentions of your contest, and/or use a contest management and reporting tool
(e.g., WooBox).
5. Post-Contest Follow-Up and Prom otion. When your contest is over, you still
have some to dos: Announce and profile your winner on your website and social
media, create a video showing you choosing the winner, send a follow-up email or
post a follow-up social post to all contest entrants, and share your plans for any
future contests.
6. Understanding Facebook Prom otions Guidelines. Facebook has very
explicit guidelines to follow when running a contest. Chief among them:


You must have a written disclaimer stating that the contest is in no way
associated with Facebook.
You cannot use a Facebook feature as an entry method (e.g., Page like, Post
like, Post comment, Post share).
Facebook contests must be housed within a tab or app on your Facebook
Page. You cannot, for example, run a contest in which people must write
something on your Facebook Page’s wall. Everything has to happen inside
the app.
